if you like mud bikes beer an optional
lactate induced pain is cyclocross is
this fourth age class racing is cheap
quick and easy to enter and it's a great
way to improve by camping skills and
keep up your riding fitness over the
winter originating in Belgium where it
is wildly popular with spectators
cyclocross is now fast growing
participation sport around the world
especially in countries such as the USA
and the UK the northern hemisphere
racing season runs from September to
February to getting into the crossing is
a perfect way to keep up your motivation
during the colder months at the
grassroots level
cyclocross is one of the most accessible
forms of cycle racing and it's not
uncommon to see riders ranging from six
to sixty at the same event for this
reason and because of its unique culture
the crossing is exceptionally welcoming
to newcomers of any age take the whole
family and even if they don't want to
ride they'll have a great day soaking up
the festival-like atmosphere while
cheering you on all you need is an
off-road bike in working order and away
you go
more on this later Elite CX riders are
up there with the top road professionals
when it comes to fitness but the beauty
of the sport is that you can participate
and have fun with minimal training races
usually take place in parks or large
recreational areas and will use natural
terrain to create a varied and exciting
course cross incorporates unique
features including small hurdles to jump
over steps to run up and even a sandpit
to run or ride through the running
sections are usually very short but
dismounts remains and carrying are
important techniques with budding
cyclocross racers before your first
event it's a good idea to find a field
or quiet grassy area or you can get a
feel for these specific techniques and
the inevitable spills that come with
them just make sure you have the
blessing of whoever owns or administers
the land races are usually measured in
time knock distance and a relatively
short consisting of multiple laps
lasting around 8 minutes seniors will
often race from 50 minutes to an hour
whereas younger or older categories
raise from 15 to 40 minutes you'll find
events listings on the websites of
national governing bodies such as
British Cycling and USA Cycling
you can raise cross on any offer bike
and if you want to dip your toe into the
water before committing then you won't
feel out of place walking up to an event
on your mountain bike that said if
you're feeling flush and already have
permission from your significant other
then a dedicated cyclocross bike might
be a wise investment they've become
increasingly popular over the past few
years driven by both the growth in
racing especially in the USA and the
realization that they make excellent
commuter bikes other than a more upright
geometry thanks to a high handlebar
position cyclocross bikes are usually
built with a clean internal front
triangle
this means cables are routed above the
top tube or internally through the frame
to allow easier and more comfortable
shouldering of the bike being an
off-road sport involving more than a
little mud
cyclocross is also headed the curb when
it comes to braking and compared to road
bikes you'll see disc brakes on
relatively inexpensive models as cross
is a predominantly winter sport tire
choice is a vital aspect of racing the
commonly see tires with whit's of 31 to
35 C and almost always feature a tread
that more closely resembles a mountain
bike tire than a Roland finding exactly
the right pressure is somewhat of an art
form and you're often see experienced
riders using multiple practice laps to
master pressure to the terrain and
conditions by process of trial and error
in the dead of winter when conditions
often range from quagmire to biblical
tires can be run as low as 12 psi in the
early season when race is a dryer this
can go up to around 30 psi cyclocross is
a fast paced winter sport so your
clothing probably won't be too different
from your summer road kit that's not to
say you won't want to make a few tweaks
to account for the lower temperatures a
long sleek base layer will help to keep
your core temperature from dropping to
dangerous levels by wicking sweat and
trapping an insulating layer of air
between the skin and the outside your
gloves should be the full finger variety
and it's a good idea to have a winter
jacket but when the race is finished in
especially cold weather you may want leg
warmers or bib tights but due to the
shortness intensity of the event a one
set of big shorts will normally do the
trick
a skull cap or bandana and your helmet
will help keep the heat in on
particularly frosty mornings due to the
abundance of mud and the need to run
footwear is usually a mountain bike
style shoe and cleat although there is
an emerging trend for dedicated
cyclocross shoes fitted with metal studs
as the saying goes it's not the winning
it's a taking part that counts and
nowhere is this true as the new
cyclocross so grab yourself a cowbell
craft beer and some freaks and we'll see
you out in the field